We depend on many powerful man-made things to deliver the items that we need.
For example, a powerful freight train can climb steep hills and deliver its freight on time.
A powerful cargo ship can withstand high seas and deliver its cargo.
But there is a limit to what man's ingenuity can do.
When it comes to our most crucial needs, such as true peace, real security and lasting happiness,
humans promise what they do not have the power to deliver.
Political, religious and financial institutions have proved to be untrustworthy.
With so many promises broken, we're not surprised that many people are skeptical about the future.
But in contrast to such failures, Jehovah's promises never fail.
And we are made more powerful when we trust in his promises.
He always delivers on his word.
Jehovah promises to sustain us through any trials, no matter how intense they may become.
Consider Jesus example.
No human has faced trials more intense than what he experienced.
Yet Jesus had faith that delivered, powerful faith that carried him through.
With freeness of speech, Jesus encouraged his followers to have faith and not to doubt.
For example, on one occasion while traveling near Bethany with his disciples,
Jesus used a fig tree to provide an object lesson on the need to have faith in God.
The account in Matthew chapter 21 tells us that the fig tree was barren except for leaves.
In verses 19 and 20, Jesus said to the tree,
let no fruit come from you ever again.
And the fig tree withered instantly.
Now as a result, the disciples were amazed and they asked Jesus,
how is it that the fig tree withered instantly?
As we read Jesus reply to them in verses 21 and 22,
please keep in mind that Jesus is providing an object lesson for them.
So let's pull out the lesson about faith as we read verses 21 and 22.
And answer Jesus said to them, truly I say to you,
if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what I did to the fig tree,
but even if you say to this mountain, be lifted up and thrown into the sea,
it will happen. And all the things you ask in prayer having faith,
you will receive.
That was a powerful object lesson on faith,
especially in view of the trials that his disciples would soon experience.
But do you see any more object lessons in this example?
There's another connection between what happened to the fig tree and having faith.
You see, the nation of Israel like that fig tree had a deceptive appearance.
Although the nation was in a covenant relationship with God,
it proved to be without faith and it was barren of good fruitage.
It even rejected God's own son.
So by causing the unproductive fig tree to wither,
Jesus demonstrated what the end result would be for those without faith.
To benefit from this object lesson today, we also need to have faith and not doubt.
In this talk, we will discuss four situations that show how prayer,
study, and meditation can help us to rely fully on Jehovah's promises.
With each situation, we will look at the challenge we face,
the promise we've received, and our reason for faith in that promise.
Here's the first situation. It is when we are tempted.
What is the challenge?
The challenge is to avoid giving into temptation.
There are many things that contempt us to go down a wrong path and show a lack of faith.
We could be tempted by immoral desires that violate God's laws and principles.
We could be tempted to set spiritual interests aside and pursue material things.
We could be tempted to become prideful and ambitiously try to outdo others.
We must never allow that to happen.
The fact is that there are many things that could tempt us to show a lack of faith and of trust in Jehovah.
So now there's the challenge. Here is the promise.
Let's see Jehovah's promise in his word.
It is twofold or two-part, and we find it at 1 Corinthians chapter 10 and in verse 13.
As we read it, look for the promise, verse 13.
No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men.
But God is faithful, and He will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear.
But along with the temptation, He will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.
What is the promise here?
First, Jehovah will not let us be tempted beyond what we can bear or handle.
Also, Jehovah will help us.
He will make the way out for us, it said, that is out of any temptation if we rely on Him.
We must have faith and not doubt.
So far, we've considered the challenge and the promise.
Now let's examine our reason for faith in that promise.
Our reason for faith is this.
Jehovah knows us better than we know ourselves, and his word says that we can remain faithful.
In Deuteronomy 30 and verse 11, Jehovah told the Israelites that what he required of them was not too difficult,
nor was it beyond their reach, he said.
So for good reason, he expected them to show faith and to obey.
He expects no less of his servants today.
Let's consider some practical steps that will help us to resist temptations.
We will list them first, and then we will look more closely at two of the steps.
First, pray regularly for the needed strength.
Second, study and meditate so as to keep your mind fixed on Jehovah's promises.
Third, know your weaknesses, and fourth, avoid situations that would increase temptation.
Now let's look more closely at steps three and four.
That is the need to know our weaknesses and how to avoid situations that cause temptation for us.
We're going to begin with a chain.
It's a fact that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link, true.
Where it is weak is where it will break first.
Like a chain, we have weaknesses that others may not see,
but we should know our weaknesses.
Make certain that you know yourself and that you know where you are most vulnerable.
When we know our weaknesses, we know what to guard against.
In other words, we know where the weak link is.
When we know our weaknesses, then we are able to stand firm in the faith.
One sister said, when I face temptation, I reject it immediately.
Letting the mind dwell on the possibilities is what gets you into trouble in the first place.
So again, know your weaknesses and guard against those weaknesses.
Another important step that we listed is to avoid situations that increase temptation.
Stay away from people whose speech and conduct make wrongdoing look attractive.
Remove yourself from situations where you know you're going to face temptations.
Surround yourself with friends who encourage you to do what is right.
Proverbs 22 and verse 3 says,
that the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,
but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.
We prove to be shrewd when we trust that inspired statement and avoid temptation.
So in review, when we are tempted, we looked at the challenge, the promise,
and our reason for faith in that promise.
Then we considered what will help us to succeed,
which included the need to pray regularly and to study and meditate on God's Word.
With each of the next three situations we will follow the same pattern.
The next situation in which we must rely on Jehovah's promise
has to do with when we face opposition.
Here's the challenge.
Avoid compromising under pressure.
No doubt all of us think at times about how we would handle various problems that may eventually confront us.
Such mental exercises can be helpful,
provided that we remember that Jehovah will always be with us when we are doing his will,
which brings us to his promise.
Jehovah will give us his Holy Spirit so that we can endure opposition.
Jesus is one who trusted in that promise.
He also urged his followers to remain calm and show trust.
Consider what he said at Luke 12, 11 and 12.
Now, as we read Jesus' words,
have in mind that the scribes and the Pharisees were putting extreme pressure on him with many questions
in an effort to use Jesus' words against him.
Of course, they failed.
And Jesus here gives assurance that like him,
we too will succeed when persecution comes if we have faith and do not doubt.
At Luke 12, 11 and 12, Jesus said,
when they bring you in before public assemblies,
government officials and authorities,
do not become anxious about how or what you will speak in defense
or what you will say.
For the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour the things you should say.
How can we receive the benefits of this promise when opposition comes?
By listening carefully to Jesus' words there,
do not become anxious, Jesus said,
remain calm.
For the Holy Spirit will teach you, show trust.
Jesus is the greatest example of one who lived by those very words,
and we can too, but it takes faith.
So again, we've looked at the challenge and the promise.
Now, let's examine our reason for faith in that promise.
And it is this.
Jehovah is more powerful, infinitely more powerful than any opposer.
Here are three things all centered on Jehovah
that will help us to face persecution and opposition.
First, pray regularly, and when doing so,
express your fears to Jehovah and ask for the peace of God.
In the book of Lamentations,
the inspired writer urged God's people to pour out their heart like water.
Water can flow quickly, and like water flowing out of a large bucket,
we should not hold back when praying to our Heavenly Father,
especially whenever we are faced with opposition and persecution,
pour out your heart to Him,
and Jehovah promises that He will help you.
We must have faith in Jehovah's power to help us and trust in that promise.
As Jesus said,
do not become anxious.
Strong faith will help us to avoid such anxiety.
Second, we are also helped to face opposition when we study
and meditate on God's Word.
Daily Bible reading helps to strengthen our conviction that Jehovah loves us
and that He will never abandon us.
Focus on His tender qualities as you read His words.
A field Jehovah's love for you in the things that He says and does.
As you meditate on the words and works of Jehovah,
reflect on your own experience in His service.
You'll likely be able to list many things that our Heavenly Father has done for you
since you started to serve Him.
Yes, Bible reading and meditation draw us closer to Jehovah, our source of strength.
And the more your confidence in Him grows,
the stronger your bond with Him will become,
and the stronger your faith in Him will become.
Now related to what we just mentioned,
a third thing that will help you when opposition comes
is to reflect on how Jehovah has helped you through trials in the past.
And that is exactly what David did.
At Psalm 18 and verse 6, he said,
in my distress I called to Jehovah,
to my God I kept crying for help.
From His temple He heard my voice
and my cry for help reached His ears.
So did David recall Jehovah's help?
Yes, he did.
He heard my voice, David said,
and my cry for help reached His ears.
David not only remembered what had happened,
he had faith that Jehovah heard Him.
David was still putting that blessing to work because he never forgot
all that Jehovah had done for him.
When you know that Jehovah has helped you,
when you just know it, never forget it.
We show gratitude when we remember
and such experiences strengthen us
to face the trials yet ahead of us.
Now so far we've considered the need for faith
when we are tempted and when we face opposition.
Now we will again follow the same pattern
with the third situation
when we are afflicted with illness.
What is the challenge?
The challenge we face when we are seriously ill
is to avoid questioning whether Jehovah will care for us.
We must continue to remind ourselves
that Jehovah loves us
and that he will never abandon us.
Remember the promise.
Jehovah will sustain his loyal ones who are sick
and that promise is not just a general feeling
that you get from reading his word.
That promise is a clear statement found in Psalm 41 and verse 3.
We invite you to read it, Psalm 41 and verse 3.
But is it a promise to cure us?
Notice what it says.
Jehovah will sustain him on his sick bed.
During his sickness,
you will completely change his bed.
Did Jehovah use the word cure here?
No, he said sustain.
Jehovah will sustain us.
The cure will come later.
But his promise to sustain his servants
is a promise that we can trust.
Here is our reason for faith in that promise.
We know that Jehovah has compassion
for those who are disadvantaged by poor health
among other things.
In verse 1 of that same Psalm,
we are assured that Jehovah will rescue the lowly one.
Jehovah makes a similar loving expression
at Isaiah 57 and verse 15.
There he says,
I reside in the high and lofty place
but also with those crushed and lowly in spirit
to revive the spirit of the lowly one
and to revive the heart of those being crushed.
I reside in the holy place he said,
yet also with those crushed and lowly in spirit.
Jehovah cares deeply for us, doesn't he?
In his compassion,
he draws close to his faithful ones who are ill.
But while we should have faith that Jehovah will sustain us
and that is true, of course,
whenever we face serious illness,
what steps must we take to cope?
Here are three things that we can do
to work along with Jehovah's loving support.
First, pray regularly for practical wisdom
to deal with your illness.
James 1 and verse 6 says,
keep asking in faith not doubting at all.
Earlier Jesus said,
have faith and do not doubt.
One sister with strong faith saw the need to do her part
when she found out that she was seriously ill.
She said,
when I learned that I had cancer in my lung and colon,
I thought that I had just received a death sentence.
But after I got home from the doctor,
I thought, okay, it's not what I expected,
but I have to find a way to deal with this.
So what did she do?
She prayed and not just any prayer.
She says, I never pray, make me better.
I always pray, help me be strong and endure my illness.
Beautiful example.
That sister understands Psalm 41 and verse 3, doesn't she?
If we do not recover from an illness,
we have faith that the cure is coming in God's new world.
In the meantime,
we also have faith in Jehovah's promise
that he will sustain us through any trial,
any illness.
He will change our bed as the verse said,
meaning that Jehovah will see to it
that our sick bed will not be one of hopelessness.
Rather, we will endure with faith and hope.
Many have found that their greatest comfort
comes from heartfelt prayer
and from reading such comforting passages in God's word.
When we do this,
Jehovah will give us strength
and he will bring comforting thoughts to our mind.
That brings us to the second thing that we can do
to work along with Jehovah's promise
and his loving support.
And it is this study and meditate on Jehovah's promises
in order to strengthen your conviction in the new world
where you all have perfect health.
That time is coming.
As Isaiah 33 verse 24 foretells,
no resident will say,
I am sick.
But we can meditate on such wonderful promises
only if we take the time to read them.
So take time to read a portion of God's word every day.
Give close attention to the Psalms
and to what Jesus did during his earthly ministry.
Such accounts provide real life examples
not only of coping,
but also of godly compassion for those who are ill.
And we also have such real life examples
of compassion among us today.
So the third thing that those who are afflicted
with illness can do is benefit from association
with fellow believers to the extent possible.
We've come to appreciate this even more
after living through a pandemic, isn't that true?
One sister who has coped with serious illness says this,
do not isolate yourself.
Allow friends to help you.
There may be times when you feel alone,
but don't isolate yourself.
That's wise advice and it is scriptural advice.
Always remember that the love we see among Jehovah's people
is just a reflection of how he feels about us.
After all, he gave us the ability to love others
and his people show that God-like love
for one another every day.
So put your faith in Jehovah's sustaining power.
Put your faith in the comfort from the scriptures as well
as the loving support of family and friends.
Put your faith in Jehovah's sure promises
and hold on to the assurance that life is worth living
even when you are afflicted with a serious illness.
In all that we have considered about Jehovah's promises,
we see that faith is the essential quality that we need to have.
We need faith when we are tempted.
Faith when we face opposition
and faith when we are afflicted with serious illness.
We also need faith when we face economic hardship.
After all, we must have certain things to survive day to day
and to continue on in our service to Jehovah.
The question is, how well do we cope
when getting the necessities of life becomes difficult for us?
Food, clothing, shelter, transportation, and so forth?
You see, when these things become hard to get,
it can cause anxiety.
That's a fact, it can.
And avoiding such anxiety is a challenge
we may face.
If we ever face that challenge,
what must we call to our mind?
Jehovah's promise.
Jehovah promises that if we put the kingdom first,
he will provide the things that we need.
We must have faith in that promise.
Strong faith in that promise.
It's a promise that Jesus made very clear for us.
God's son understood that in this system of things,
his economic hardship would sometimes befall God's people.
And he made it a point to include some comments
about this challenge in his well-known sermon on the mount.
But along with the challenge,
he provided Jehovah's promise.
Please follow along as we read Matthew chapter 6
and verse 33.
Matthew 6, 33.
Jesus lived as a human.
And here's a point we want to keep in mind
as we get ready to read this verse.
He grew up in a hard-working family.
It may be that acquiring the necessities of life
did not always come easy for them.
But they trusted in Jehovah
and they had what they needed to serve him.
So what Jesus later said here,
in Matthew 6, 33,
he said as a real person,
a human who knew what people faced at times.
So with that context,
he had just urged his listeners to stop being anxious
and to trust in Jehovah's ability to help them
and then he gave the promise in verse 33.
Keep on then, he said,
seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness
and all these other things will be added to you.
The conviction in that statement
will be added,
stems from the certainty of the promise.
Jehovah cannot lie and his son does not lie.
If we put the interest of the kingdom first,
we'll experience the blessings that come from that promise.
We have many reasons to have faith in those words.
Consider, Jehovah provides daily
for the needs of plants and of birds.
So how much more so for his faithful servants?
We know that this is true not only because
the Scriptures tell us so,
but also because we see it for ourselves.
At Matthew 6, 26 through 29,
just before urging his disciples to put the kingdom first,
Jesus invited them to observe intently the birds of heaven.
Now why?
What did he want his disciples to see?
He wanted them to see how our Heavenly Father cares
for those little creatures,
how he looks after them and sees
that they have their daily food.
They have what they need.
Birds do not spend their days feeling anxious
and neither should we.
Jesus rhetorically asked,
are you not worth more than they are?
Such lessons remind us that we should trust
Jehovah's promise and in his ability and desire to keep it.
We learn from Jesus' sermon on the mount
that real happiness and security do not depend on material things.
What matters is our friendship with our Heavenly Father.
So there are the lessons,
but in practical terms,
how can you avoid anxiety over economic hardship?
Remember to pray continually.
When anxiety takes hold of a person,
he or she might overlook things
that they normally would never overlook.
Keep praying and have faith in Jehovah's promise.
He listens to our prayers.
And pray just as Jesus taught us,
not for financial security,
but for our daily needs,
our bread for this day, as he said.
And along with prayer,
remember to study and meditate on God's word each day.
This too can be overlooked
when one feels overwhelmed.
Don't let that happen to you.
Jehovah will see your effort
and he will bless you for relying on him.
Study and meditate in order to strengthen your conviction
that Jehovah will take care of you.
He promises to do so.
In all of this, don't forget your past blessings.
Just as Jehovah sustained his people in the past,
reflect on how Jehovah has helped you.
He has not changed.
Use that experience to build up your faith and your conviction
that Jehovah will go on helping you
through difficult times.
We live in a largely faithless and skeptical world,
isn't that true?
We need faith.
And when we have it,
we must keep it strong.
When we have faith in Jehovah's promises and do not doubt,
we are helped to face whatever may come our way.
We are helped when we are tempted,
when we face opposition,
when we are afflicted with illness
and when we experience economic hardship.
In these critical last days,
all of us, each one of us,
needs to keep growing in faith.
Cultivate the yearning that Jesus apostles had
toward growing in faith.
We can see their desire in what they said to Jesus
in Luke chapter 17 and in verse five.
Luke 17 five, please go to that verse.
And we will also read Jesus reply to them in verse six.
After hearing Jesus warn about those who caused stumbling,
we read starting in verse five,
that the apostles said to the Lord,
give us more faith than the Lord said.
If you had faith the size of a mustard grain,
you would say to this black mulberry tree,
be uprooted and planted in the sea.
And it would obey you.
In other words, have faith and do not doubt
he was telling them.
Now, it is extremely unlikely
that you will ever need to command a black mulberry tree
to uproot itself and be planted in the sea.
So then what was Jesus' point?
It is this.
We are powerful by faith.
Challenges that may seem equally impossible
have been overcome or defeated by our faith in God's power.
Faith helps us to conquer any temptation that we face.
Faith helps us to defeat any opposition
that rises up against us.
Faith sustains us through any illness we may experience.
And faith strengthens us to trust in Jehovah's promise
to support us during economic hardship.
In other words, uproot the mulberry tree
and plant it in the sea.
As we considered in each of those situations,
we reviewed how prayer, study, and meditation
will help us to stay close to Jehovah,
the one who will grant us more faith.
Pray for it each day.
Inmitate examples of faith found in God's Word
as well as those serving along with us today.
Remain focused on Jehovah who fulfills all of his promises
and he will bless your efforts to have faith and not to doubt.